The first time I ever saw a computer was in the spare room at my grandparents house. It looked like something from a 1970s science fiction movie, and was threatening to destroy the table it was precariously perched upon - such was it's girth. It had been purchased to use for book-keeping at the family business, and was being prepared with accounts software. Of course I didn't know this at the time - I was only seven or eight years old - all I knew was that it looked awesome, and that I was not allowed to go near it, breathe on it, or touch it under any circumstances.

The computer re-appeared some years later - perched on top of a chest of drawers in my brother's bedroom during the school summer holidays. Dad returned home from work with it one day, wired it up, and let us play with it. We had no idea what the computer might be able to do, how to use it, or what it might even be useful for. We played with it in the same manner I had played with the old cooker in the garage - pretending we were commanders on a space rocket - pressing buttons, shouting random commands, and spending hours on flights of imagination around the universe.

Luckily my brother had a friend. During the early 1980s most people had a similar friend. He knew about computers. He also had a comically bad haircut, and didn't go outside much - but that was all forgotten when he sat down in front of the computer in my brother's bedroom, slid a floppy disk into the slot in the front of the machine, turned the lever that locked the strange floppy rectangle in- place, and began typing.

After several minutes watching him type - munching on chocolate biscuits and drinking orange squash - we were invited to sit in front of the computer.

"What planet would you like to destroy ?"

> |

The cursor sat, blinking - waiting for us to type something in.

> Earth

"Earth will be destroyed in..."
"5..."
"4..."
"3..."
"2..."
"1..."
"Earth has been destroyed."

We stared at the screen with eyes like saucers. We had just destroyed the earth. It was both scary, and exciting at the same time. Not only could we now go on imaginary flights around the solar system - we could blow up planets, and the computer said it had really happened. Over the course of the next few minutes we blew up every planet in the local solar system, the school, next door's dog, the ice cream van we could hear several streets away, and any number of other things that came to mind. As each detonation was announced, a chorus of "it's my turn!" would ring out across the bedroom.

Not knowing how to save the program my brother's friend had written, we printed it out. Every time we wanted to play the game again, we would re-key the program. Occasionally we tried to change the programming to make it more impressive, but that invariably led to the computer silently murmuring "Syntax Error" at us.

Oh the fun we had that summer. We didn't need an X-Box, or a Playstation, or girls - we were too busy blowing up planets. Strangely it never occurred to us that blowing up the planet you were standing on was a ridiculous thing to do.

Then one day a disaster happened. The computer stopped working. It made odd clunking noises after turning it on, and the screen reported some jibbering or other about not finding something or other. We did what any normal person would do - we cleaned the computer. After fetching a can of furniture polish, and a duster, we cleaned it to within an inch of it's life - including the floppy disks. Looking back, we probably made it much, much worse. It was now very clean, smelled of a meadow in springtime, and didn't work at all.

It's funny how childhood works though, because a few minutes after the disaster unfolded there was a knock at the door, and we all went out to play. The computer was eventually donated to the local secondary school - to be used as a "skeleton" for educational purposes. The computer teacher also mentioned that it would make the classroom look quite cool.