In the spring of 2000 my Dad retired. The family business had been sold, meaning he, and his siblings could retire early. I remember the day he came home from work for the last time - after signing off the final pieces of paperwork. It was a strange day - quieter than you might think.

A few weeks later, Mum and Dad disappeared to Cornwall for a few days - to get away from the mayhem of everything surrounding the sale of the business (including family members of old friends turning up out of the woodwork with all manner of begging requests - some of the letters had to be seen to be believed).

I suppose they had been gone about a week when the phone rang.

"Hello?"

"Hi - it's Dad. We've just had an offer accepted on a house down here, and have put our house on the market. Just letting you know, because you'll need to start looking for your own place."

I don't remember the rest of the conversation. I was a bit shell-shocked.

I had lived at 9 Davis Close since I was five years old - now I was 25. I had been looking around anyway, and had already saved up most of the deposit for a mortgage - I just hadn't actively looked at anywhere yet.

The week after my parents returned from Cornwall, I went looking at apartments with my Dad. We saw perhaps four during a busy morning driving back and forth across Witney, and decided that one in particular was better than the rest. It was a first floor apartment - a leasehold , about a mile from the town centre.

The only problem I had was in securing funds for a mortgage. Although I had started filling out the mortgage application, I hadn't submitted it yet. Given the speed we were having to do things, my Dad stepped in.

I can remember the phone call the estate agent made to the seller like it was yesterday:

"I have a young man here that is offering a small amount less than the asking price. He is a first time buyer, and doesn't yet have an approved mortgage application - it's in progress right now - but does have access to family funds. If there are any problems with the mortgage, he can purchase the property outright this afternoon. It doesn't get much better than that - I would advise you to accept."

The estate agent put the phone back down, and grinned.

"The client has accepted your offer - congratulations Mr Beckett - you have just agreed to the purchase of your first property!"

It was all a bit surreal. We returned home, and told my Mum the news. She got a bit tearful all of a sudden. I suppose this really was it - I was going to be leaving home. It was all a bit silly of course - my brother had left home a few years previously, to live with his then fiancé.

The day before I moved in, I went shopping with my Dad. Although I had managed to secure the mortgage myself, and pay the deposit, it had been a close-run thing. My bank account was pretty-much wiped out overnight. Six thousand gone. And I didn't have any budget left for appliances. After a bit of arm twisting I finally gave in, and accepted help.

I've always been stupidly independent. If I can do things on my own, I will. I think half the reason for it is because my brother is the opposite way - if he can get something, he doesn't care how he gets it. I always want to make sure if I achieve something, I do it myself if I can.

Luckily my Dad knew lots of local shops that sold used appliances - so after a drive around a few of them, we came home with a refurbished washing machine, and fridge. Apparently the existing cooker was being left in the apartment.

The next morning my Aunt arrived with her horse-box, and we loaded it with everything I owned in the world - two computer desks, a computer, a music system, my music collection, a television, an office chair, two book shelves, the books on them, a single bed, and an old wardrobe that my parents were trying to get rid of. That was it. Oh - and my clothes of course.

We picked the keys up at lunchtime, and by mid-afternoon my worldly possessions had been carried up to the apartment. My parents came to visit a little later, bringing me a saucepan, a couple of mugs, a plate, some cutlery, and some groceries. I didn't have a kettle to make a cup of tea, so warmed water on the stove in the saucepan they had brought with them.

When Mum and Dad left, Mum had a few more tears.

I'm always amazed when I see people starting out these days - at the things they are given, and the things they expect to have. I had no couch for several months - I couldn't afford it. When I first met Wendy, I had a blanket on the living room floor, and two fishing chairs - I never used them though. I would either sit at the computer desk, or lie on the floor.

I suppose a description of the building and the apartment wouldn't go amiss. As you entered from the car-park, you climbed a set of stairs through a clean and tidy atrium area, where there were pigeon holes for post. My apartment was directly at the top of the stairs, on the left side - the building had four apartments, identical in design to each other - with the right side mirroring the left.

The apartment door lead through to an entrance way, that lead to each room - to the left was the living room, then a galley kitchen along the back of the living room, then the bathroom, then the master bedroom, and then a children's bedroom - that I converted into a study.

For the first few weeks I bounced around the apartment like a spare part - I had very little furniture at all. As soon as my next salary payment went into the bank I put a huge order in at Argos, buying about forty different items. I can still remember the delivery driver walking up and down the stairs with bag after bag of boxes. I suddenly had cutlery, plates, mugs, a kitchen clock, a bath mat, lamp shades, a dinner table for the lounge, and all manner of other things. All the things you might expect to find in a house.

My sister-in-law took me shopping for "the important" things. We went to Woolworths, and bought kitchen knives, a chopping block, and various pots to keep food in. She also took me grocery shopping, and instructed me on what to buy in order to save money. Until then I had pretty much bought whatever I wanted - I had only ever known expendable income.

I suppose the first big purchase was a sofa. I ordered it off the internet, and was horrifed when they told me it would take eight weeks from order to delivery. I told friends about it, and they laughed - apparently that's just how long furniture takes. It's worth mentioning that this was before IKEA became a thing.

The next big purchases were two bookshelves. There was a pine specialist that I walked past on my way to and from town - one day something made me walk in, and I ordered two of their bookcases for delivery. I still have those bookcases now - twenty-something years later. Our eldest daughter has one in her bedroom.

