A few months after the Alphatronic debacle, I tagged along with my Dad to visit the local television rental shop. We had rented our television for years - most people did. Or rather, most people we knew did. In the shop we were shown an apparently amazing new thing called a lazer disc player, along with various televisions. This was back in the era of cathods-ray-tube televisions that weight about the same as a small car. It's quite sad that children will never know the struggle of watching a portable television while on-holiday, with it wired up to a car battery, Dad holding the aerial in the air to get a good signal, and the screen slowly diminishing in size as the battery charge depletes.

Where was I. Oh yes - the television rental shop. On this particular visit, the shop also had a display of "home computers". They all seemed to be made by Sharp, and were mightily impressive - much smaller than the computer we had recently destroyed, and seemingly capable of doing anything if you believed the promotional pamphlet. The glossy brochure kicked around at home for months - right up until Christmas in fact.

When I opened my Christmas presents that year though, I didn't find one of the computers we had looked at. Oh no. I found a "Sony HitBit". An MSX. Although it's easy to criticise now, it was actually a really smart move. While Commodore, Sinclair, and Atari all made incompatible computers, the Japanese companies had all agreed to make compatible systems - Sony, Sanyo, Toshiba, Goldstar, and Yamaha all made MSX computers that ran the same software. There was only one problem - everybody carried on buying Commodore, Sinclair, and Atari computers.

This resulted in the video game shelves of the local toy store being stacked with row upon row of games - hundreds of games - for every home computer system, and the MSX being relegated to the bottom row, with perhaps five or six to choose from - one or two of which would be affordable on a pocket-money budget.

I wonder how many hours I spent deliberating over a £1.99 video game on cassette tape that would ultimately turn out to be shit, and forgotten before lunchtime on a Saturday ?

Cassette tapes! Later generations really haven't lived, have they. If you grew up using home computers during the mid-eighties, you knew all about the hell of cassette tapes. Not only did you need to plug a tape recorder into your computer, you also needed to set the volume exactly right for every single tape. Upon pressing play, and keying the correct commands into the computer, a high pitch squeal would ring out across the room before the the computer and tape recorder began communicating in pure noise with each other. That's what it sounded like, anyway. Even if you got everything right, and held high hopes of playing your game in a few minutes time (because loading a few kilobytes took entire minutes), you might still face failure at any point. I think perhaps the most heart wrenching episodes were when the tape reached it's end, and the video game still looked like it was loading - and you hadn't noticed for quite some time.

Luckily the MSX had something that many other home computers didn't at that time - a cartridge slot. Yes, the old Atari 2600 had cartridges, but home computers didn't tend to have them. I was lucky enough to get a cartridge based game that first Christmas too - "Yee Arr Kung Foo". No racial stereotypes going on there then! It turns out Konami - one of the most famous producers of coin operated arcade machines - had singed on to create games for the MSX range of computers, and were busy porting a lot of their back-catalog to the MSX. Imagine that - first party ports of arcade machines. Although we only ever owned one or two of them, their arrival turned out house into the must-visit destination for those in-the-know.

It's funny though - although we had some games for the computer that first Christmas, we didn't really play them. It snowed that year - so like any other normal kids, we disregarded all of the presents our parents had scrimped and saved to buy us, and ran around like lunatics outside, pelting snowballs at each other. This had an unintended consequence though - my Dad was left alone with the computer, and set about learning to program it.

Over the Christmas period, we would wander back into the house - walking snow with us, and being shouted at for it - and my Dad would invariably be hunched over the computer with the guide book next to him. The guide book that came with the Sony MSX had comic book characters sprinkled throughout, to help explain the concepts behind programming. Looking back now, they were Chibi Manga cartoons, but this was at least twenty years before “Manga” became a thing.

Now and again my Dad would encourage us to sit and watch the results of his endeavors. I still remember him typing “RUN”, and watching a low resolution facsimile of the Olympic rings draw onto the screen.

“What does it do?”

“That’s it”

“Oh.”

I guess the eleven year old version of me was pretty difficult to impress. Over the next few days he slowly added to his program - it asked your name, your age, your favourite colour, and so on - and then made pithy comments about the information you had entered. Mum didn’t think it was very funny when she discovered the program had been fixed to recognise her name, and be purposely rude.

I suppose in some ways I have my Dad to thank for everything that followed. He was the one that showed me that a computer could be programmed - that the games you might buy off the shelf in the toy shop had been written by somebody no better than you or me - just a little (or a lot) more experienced, and with a lot more time and determination on their hands. I didn’t start writing any programs of note - I never would on the MSX, but it sowed a seed that would come to fruition some five years later.

For several years, the MSX was our family computer. My Dad obsessed over a game called "Les Flics" that could most accurately be described as a collection of coloured blobs that you could move around the screen with the joystick, that would make noises, and the screen flash from time to time. The box artwork told another story - you were a bank robber, and you were stealing things from various buildings, with the police in hot pursuit. A lot of imagination was required in the early days of computer games.

Back in the early 1980s, computer magazines were a huge business - especially if you owned a less popular machine. We would typically get one or two magazines a month, and I would read them cover to cover. Some of the writers became unlikely rock stars among the nerd community at school - Julian Rignall, that wrote for Computer and Video Games comes to mind. At the time, he looked like he just walked off stage with Duran Duran - looking back now, he was probably just out of college, had too much hair gel, and was trying too hard. In the back pages of the magazines you would find adverts for shops selling all manner of computer accessories and games - and one of them leads to perhaps the most ridiculous story about the MSX.

During my childhood years, we invariably went on holiday to Cornwall, in the south west of England. During one such holiday in the early 1980s, the weather wasn't cooperating at all, which meant we "went out for the day", rather than go to the beach. Dad drove us on a magical mystery tour of towns and villages until we reached a small town called "Tavistock", that looked nice - even though it was raining cats and dogs. The town became our destination for the day purely because of an advert that regularly appeared at the back of computer magazines - for a shop called "Tavistock Hi-Fi", that stocked everything to do with MSX computers. If you were unlucky enough to own an MSX, it was kind of like Mecca, but without prayer mats.

After walking the various streets of the town in search of the famous shop, and getting increasingly wet from the non-stop rain, we had lunch in an oddly religious cafe - complete with creepy printouts of psalms on the walls, and a waitress with long hair and a huge gap in her front teeth. While Mum and Dad talked about whatever it is that parents talk about in cafes, I spied a newsagent across the road. The newsagent might have computer magazines. The magazines might have the advert in them. The advert would have the address written on it.

(It's worth pointing out that having the address would still require a map - this was thirty years before we all had all-knowing devices in our back pockets).

I ran across the road with Dad, found a magazine, and found the advert. There it was - Tavistock Hi-Fi! In Bedford. I asked Dad where Bedford was - 250 miles away. Bugger. We never did visit the "real" Tavistock Hi-Fi, and strangely enough we never went back to Tavistock in Cornwall either. Years later, my parents retired, and moved to Cornwall - and whenever we visit and pass road signs with Tavistock on them, I break into a smile.


